# Baking

I mostly bake yeasted doughs, mostly breads, mostly with preferments. In
this document I'm writing about how I approach baking in general;
recipes will come later.

## Mindset

Baking is different than cooking, especially on the stovetop, but two
principles remain: never let the food win, and even your mistakes will
probably be edible. I let the idea of baking intimidate me for years,
which means I spent years needlessly eating mediocre bread. Don't be
like Past Matt.

### Patience and experimentation

Unlike stovetop cooking, many of your decisions in baking take hours or
even days to pay off. That makes it more important to bring a mindset
of experimentation: what are you going to try, what do you expect to
happen, how do you think it'll work. Writing stuff down is a bit more
important when baking than when cooking, but not overwhelmingly so.

#### Details matter, but not all at once

There's all kinds of things you can focus on when baking: dough
temperature, room temperature, how much yeast, how much hydration,
how much protein in your flour, whether you did an autolyse and for
how long, how many folds and how long between each... just an awful lot
of decisions to make that won't show up, if at all, until hours later
when the bread has cooled and you cut into it.

That makes it tempting to try to keep track of _all the things_ and pore
over them later to figure out why your loaf overproofed or your crumb
ended up dense. Resist the temptation. Start with a recipe you like,
bake it once or twice to get a feel for how it works as written - hang
on, I have a digression:

> The problem with following recipes is that you'll never be able to get
> things _exactly_ the way the author did. Your kitchen won't have the
> same patterns of temperature and humidity; your all-purpose flour
> might have more (or less) protein; your instant yeast might be fresher
> (or older); and so on. If you're cooking and your "1 medium onion"
> looks like it's going to be too small, you can easily add more as you
> go; if you're baking you might not even _notice_ a difference in your
> flour's protein content (odds are the recipe writer didn't note theirs
> for you to compare, either). As ever, other people's recipes are a
> starting point, not a guarantee of results.

So once you have a baseline for how a particular bread should work, you
can start tracking _some of_ the details that you'd like to experiment
with. Maybe you've read that higher hydration will make a more open
crumb (which you'd like) -- try raising the hydration a few percent and
see what happens. This is a slow development process, and sometimes a
frustrating one when your changes don't pan out as you'd have liked, but
your intermediate steps are probably still going to be awfully good
compared to what you'd get from the store. As you go, changing one or
maybe two things at a time, you'll get a sense for what works.

#### Sometimes the best thing to do is nothing

Both gluten and yeast develop on their own schedules, not yours. This
can be frustrating, or an enormous relief, depending on how you approach
it (and one approach is to plan your baking well in advance, so you're
not in a frantic rush to get something in the oven or on the table).

Generally speaking, the longer you can ferment your dough, the more
flavour it'll develop. (Go too far and you'll discover that _more_ does
not necesarily imply _better_, but that takes several days and you're
unlikely to do it by accident.) There are several ways to achieve this
without your yeast eating all the starches it can find: you can make a
preferment with just a little bit of yeast; you can bulk ferment your
dough in the refrigerator overnight; you can proof your dough in the
fridge, too. Making a sourdough starter and building levains from it is
maybe the logical conclusion of "take longer and build flavour", if you
don't mind having a pet that needs feeding on a stricter schedule than
any cat I've met. But in general, you can slow the yeast down (if you
need to) by putting the dough in the fridge.

Gluten also runs on its own schedule, although it's easier to speed up
than yeast. You can, if you want, bully a dough into developing gluten
by throwing it in a food processor or a stand mixer on high, but an
overworked dough is an unpleasant thing to try to shape. On the other
hand, give a wet, shaggy ball of flour and water an hour to autolyse,
and you end up with something much more compliant on the other side;
give a tight, bouncy preshaped dough ball twenty minutes to relax, and
it becomes much easier to shape into a loaf or bun. Often I find the
best response to misbehaving dough is to ignore it for half an hour.

And at last -- when you've baked your loaves and your kitchen smells
amazing and they come out of the oven crackling, the crumb needs to cool
to set, and cutting right in won't do you any favours. Depending on your
baking schedule, this can be infuriating in that bread you bake tonight
might not be ready to eat until _tomorrow_. That is, to me, just part of
the process.

### Tradition and novelty

Bread goes back millenia -- some claim with varying levels of irony that
wheat domesticated humans -- so it's tempting to think of baking as an
ancient, slow-moving art recently debased by crass commercialism. That
isn't especially true! [Baguettes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baguette)
as we know them are just over a century old; [ciabatta](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ciabatta)
was developed by Italian bakers as a response in 1982. (I am older than
ciabatta.)

Preferments based on commercial yeast (as opposed to old dough) are a
19th century innovation. The autolyse technique was put forth by Raymond
Calvel in the mid-70s in response to the high-speed gluten development
needs of commercial baking (see "patience" above). None of this is set
in stone by ossified tradition, and "new" means "better" at least as
often as it means "worse" when it comes to stuff you'd do in your home.
I am dead certain that the state of the art in artisan bread is found in
forum posts and discord channels.

With all that in mind, I don't _venerate_ baking tradition. I'll use a
dough improver or a tiktok hack if it gets me better bread.

That said, I do my baking by hand. Mostly this comes down to not owning
a stand mixer, which itself comes down to lack of usable space in my
kitchen, but I also (usually) like the feel of working with dough and I
don't mind taking an extra hour in the evening to do a bunch of folds
instead of just running a Kitchenaid for fifteen minutes on low.

And with that, let's get into tools and ingredients.

## Tools, techniques, and ingredients

I don't do anything especially novel, here, but it's worth mentioning
what I _do_ so you have it in mind while reading.

### Flours and other dry ingredients

I mostly bake with all-purpose (AP) flour from a local mill called
[Anita's Organic Mill](https://www.anitasorganic.com/products). Their
AP flour runs about 13% protein, which is on the high side; if yours is
closer to 10% or 11% you might substitute bread flour when I write AP.

I also use whole-wheat in most everything I bake, and some pizza flour
in my pizzas. Recently I've been putting vital wheat gluten in nearly
everything, to make a stronger dough, and I'm coming around to the idea
that I probably shouldn't be putting it in _everything_.

I use instant dry yeast; if yours is _active_ dry yeast use a little
bit more, or give it longer to rise.

I use Diamond Crystal salt, which shouldn't matter because all the dry
ingredients are measured by weight. I usually use granulated sugar, not
honey, as a sweetener.

### Tools

I have a [Danish (or Dutch) whisk](https://www.tasteofhome.com/article/what-is-a-danish-dough-whisk/)
which helps mix dough to a rough level of incorporation, although I tend
to switch to mixing by hand for anything that isn't really wet. It's
easy to clean, which is nice.

I also just bought a baking steel, which helps transfer a _lot_ of heat
into bread in my plucky, low-budget apartment oven. I've used a baguette
pan before but kinda prefer the steel; I'd go back to the baguette pan
for something like banh mi rolls which don't lean hard on oven spring. I
also have a small loaf pan.

Otherwise, I have a digital scale for measuring stuff out, a metal
bench scraper and two plastic bowl scrapers, a small banneton for making
batards, and various sheet pans and bowls. I scale small amounts of dry
ingredients into one-cup deli containers and grow preferments in their
four-cup counterparts.

### Techniques

I almost always build a preferment for my bread. Usually that's a biga
(around 60-65% hydration of the flour in the preferment); I've done
poolishes before (around 100% hydration) but the biga's more pleasant to
work with. I haven't grown a sourdough starter because it feels like too
much work, especially ongoing work. I can mix a biga first thing in the
morning on a weekday, put it on my desk to ferment while I work, and mix
the dough in the evening. Lately I've been putting all the whole wheat I
use into the biga and it's worked nicely; my bigas end up around 50% of
the flour by weight.

I also almost always autolyse whatever flour didn't make it into the
biga with what's left of the water (up to 100% hydration on the autolyse
at least). That gives the gluten a head start and makes mixing by hand
more pleasant.

I _also_ almost always bulk ferment the dough overnight in the fridge.
For the amount of bread I usually bake (around 300-320g flour) a deep
sixth pan works nicely.

I don't have a preferred mixing technique, although I'll probably
develop a fondness for one or two over many others. Usually I'll do
bowl folds with a dough that's nice and smooth; if it's too slack to
work with I'll do a round of french folds until it coheres better (and
then rest it before trying bowl folds again).

> One day I will link to videos and other resources on what all that
> shit means.
